feat: support for swift export (#5009)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/native/native-swift-export.md

> [//]: # (title: Interoperbility with Swift using Swift export)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[//]: # (title: Interoperability with Swift using Swift export)
```

<primary-label ref="experimental-general"/>

Kotlin provides experimental support for Swift export. It allows you to export Kotlin sources
directly and call Kotlin code from Swift idiomatically, eliminating the need for Objective-C headers.

Swift export makes multiplatform development for Apple targets easier. For example, if you have a Kotlin module
with top-level functions, Swift export enables clean, module-specific imports, removing the confusing Objective-C
underscores and mangled names.

Current Swift export features are:

* **Multi-module support**. Each Kotlin module is exported as a separate Swift module, simplifying function calls.
* **Package support**. Kotlin packages are explicitly preserved during export, avoiding naming conflicts in the
  generated Swift code.

> * **Type aliases**. Kotlin type aliases are exported and preserved in Swift, improving readability.

Reviewer: Hmm 🤔 
Would something like this work or does it shift the meaning too much? (just to move away from passive)
Kotlin exports type aliases to Swift and preserves them, improving readability

Author: We could have used "Swift export" as a subject everywhere here in the list, but it's very repetitive, and in this case creates a double "export"

* **Enhanced nullability for primitives**. Unlike Objective-C interop, which required boxing types like `Int?` into
  wrapper classes like `KotlinInt` to preserve nullability, Swift export converts nullability information directly.
* **Overloads**. You can call Kotlin's overloaded functions in Swift without ambiguity.
* **Flattened package structure**. You can translate Kotlin packages into Swift enums, removing the package prefix from
  generated Swift code.
* **Module name customization**. You can customize the resulting Swift module names in the Gradle configuration of your
  Kotlin project.

## How to enable

The feature is currently [Experimental](components-stability.md#stability-levels-explained) and not ready for production.
To try it out, [configure the build file](#kotlin-project-configuration) in your Kotlin project and [set up Xcode](#xcode-project-configuration)
to integrate Swift export.

> ### Kotlin project configuration

Reviewer: Hmm 🤔 What do you think about using active voice for these sections? 
## Enable Swift export
### Configure your build file
### Configure Xcode

or something similar?

> You can use the following build file in your project as a starting point for setting up Swift export:

Reviewer: if we are using Kotlin Gradle, do you think we could write: 

You can use the following Gradle build file

```kotlin
// build.gradle.kts
kotlin {

    iosArm64()
    iosSimulatorArm64()

    swiftExport {
        // Root module name
        moduleName = "Shared"

        // Collapse rule
        // Removes package prefix from generated Swift code
        flattenPackage = "com.example.sandbox"

>         // Export external modules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Exports external modules
```

        export(project(":subproject")) {
            // Exported module name
            moduleName = "Subproject"

>             // Collapse exported dependency rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            // Collapses the exported dependency rule
```

            flattenPackage = "com.subproject.library"
        }

>         // Provide compiler arguments to link tasks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Provides compiler arguments to link tasks
```

Author: This code snippet also works as a list of features, so I re-wrote it as the imperative

        configure {
            freeCompilerArgs.add("-Xexpect-actual-classes")
        }
    }
}
```

The Kotlin compiler automatically generates all the necessary files (including `swiftmodule` files,

> static `a` library, and header and `modulemap` files) and copies them into the app's build directory, which you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
static `.a` library, a header file, and a `modulemap` file) and copies them into the app's build directory, which you can
```

access from Xcode.

> You can also clone our [public sample](https://github.com/Kotlin/swift-export-sample) with Swift export already set
> up.
>
{style="tip"}

### Xcode project configuration

> To configure Xcode to integrate Swift export in your project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure Xcode to integrate Swift export into your project:
```

1. In Xcode, open the project settings.
2. On the **Build Phases** tab, locate the **Run Script** phase with the `embedAndSignAppleFrameworkForXcode` task.

> 3. Adjust the script to feature the `embedSwiftExportForXcode` task instead in the run script phase:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Replace the script with the `embedSwiftExportForXcode` task in the run script phase:
```

   ```bash
   ./gradlew :<Shared module name>:embedSwiftExportForXcode
   ```

   ![Add the Swift export script](xcode-swift-export-run-script-phase.png){width=700}

> 4. Build the project. Swift modules are generated in the build output directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Build the project. The build generates Swift modules in the output directory.
```

## Current limitations

Swift export currently works only in projects that use
[direct integration](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/kotlin-multiplatform-dev/multiplatform-direct-integration.html) to
connect the iOS framework to the Xcode project.
This is a standard configuration for Kotlin Multiplatform projects created with the Kotlin Multiplatform plugin in IntelliJ
IDEA or through the [web wizard](https://kmp.jetbrains.com/).

> Other known issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional limitations include:
```

Author: I think it's just shorter and covers the list below better

* When exported to Swift, Kotlin generic type parameters are type-erased to their upper bounds.
* Swift closures can be passed into Kotlin, but Kotlin cannot export functional types to Swift.
* Cross-language inheritance is not supported, so Swift classes cannot directly subclass from Kotlin-exported classes or
  interfaces.
* No IDE migration tips or automation are available.

> * When using declarations that require opt-in, it's necessary to add an explicit `optIn` compiler option at the _module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When using declarations that require opt-in, you must add an explicit `optIn` compiler option at the _module
```

| `Long`                 | `Int64`                        |                                                      |
| `UByte`                | `UInt8`                        |                                                      |
| `UShort`               | `UInt16`                       |                                                      |
| `UInt`                 | `UInt32`                       |                                                      |
| `ULong`                | `UInt64`                       |                                                      |
| `Float`                | `Float`                        |                                                      |
| `Double`               | `Double`                       |                                                      |
| `Any`                  | `KotlinBase` class             |                                                      |
| `Unit`                 | `Void`                         |                                                      |
| `Nothing`              | `Never`                        | [note](#kotlin-nothing)                              |

### Declarations

#### Classes

> Swift export supports only final classes that directly inherit from `Any` (like `class Foo()`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swift export supports only final classes that directly inherit from `Any`, like `class Foo()`.
```

They are translated to Swift classes that inherit from a special `KotlinBase` class:

```kotlin
// Kotlin
class MyClass {
    val property: Int = 0

    fun method() {}
}
```

```swift
// Swift
public class MyClass : KotlinRuntime.KotlinBase {
    public var property: Swift.Int32 {
        get {
            // ...
        }
    }
    public override init() {
        // ...
    }
    public func method() -> Swift.Void {
        // ...
    }
}
```

#### Objects

> Objects are translated to Swift classes with private `init` and static `shared` accessor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Objects are translated to Swift classes with a private `init` and static `shared` accessor:
```

```kotlin
// Kotlin
object O
```

```swift
// Swift
public class O : KotlinRuntime.KotlinBase {
    public static var shared: O {
        get {
            // ...
        }
    }
    private override init() {
        // ...
    }
}
```

> #### Typealiases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Type aliases
```

> Kotlin typealiases are exported as is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kotlin type aliases are exported as is:
```

```kotlin
// Kotlin
typealias MyInt = Int
```

```swift
// Swift
public typealias MyInt = Swift.Int32
```

#### Functions

Swift export supports only simple top-level functions and methods.

> Extensions, `suspend`, `inline`, and `operator` subtypes are not supported.

Reviewer: 🤔 What do we mean by subtypes here?

> Extensions, `suspend`, `inline`, and `operator` subtypes are not supported.

Author: Thank you! updated the Functions section

```kotlin
// Kotlin
fun foo(a: Short, b: Bar) {}

fun baz(): Long = 0
```

```swift
// Swift
public func foo(a: Swift.Int16, b: Bar) -> Swift.Void {
    // ...
}

public func baz() -> Swift.Int64 {
    // ...
}
```

#### Properties

Kotlin properties are translated to Swift properties:

```kotlin
// Kotlin
val a: Int = 0

var b: Short = 15

const val c: Int = 0
```

```swift
// Swift
public var a: Swift.Int32 {
    get {
        // ...
    }
}
public var b: Swift.Int16 {
    get {
        // ...
    }
    set {
        // ...
    }
}
public var c: Swift.Int32 {
    get {
        // ...
    }
}
```

#### Constructors

Constructors are translated to Swift initializers:

```kotlin
// Kotlin
class Foo(val prop: Int)
```

```swift
// Swift
public class Foo : KotlinRuntime.KotlinBase {
    public init(
        prop: Swift.Int32
    ) {
        // ...
    }
}
```

### Types

#### kotlin.Nothing

> `Nothing` is translated to the `Never` type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kotlin `Nothing` type is translated to the `Never` type:
```

> up.
>
{style="tip"}

### Xcode project configuration

To configure Xcode to integrate Swift export in your project:

1. In Xcode, open the project settings.
2. On the **Build Phases** tab, locate the **Run Script** phase with the `embedAndSignAppleFrameworkForXcode` task.
3. Adjust the script to feature the `embedSwiftExportForXcode` task instead in the run script phase:

   ```bash
   ./gradlew :<Shared module name>:embedSwiftExportForXcode
   ```

   ![Add the Swift export script](xcode-swift-export-run-script-phase.png){width=700}

4. Build the project. Swift modules are generated in the build output directory.

## Current limitations

Swift export currently works only in projects that use
[direct integration](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/kotlin-multiplatform-dev/multiplatform-direct-integration.html) to
connect the iOS framework to the Xcode project.
This is a standard configuration for Kotlin Multiplatform projects created with the Kotlin Multiplatform plugin in IntelliJ
IDEA or through the [web wizard](https://kmp.jetbrains.com/).

Other known issues:

* When exported to Swift, Kotlin generic type parameters are type-erased to their upper bounds.

> * Functional types defined in Kotlin can be passed to Swift, but not vice versa.

Author: Oh, I see! thank you, updated this line
